Once again, good morning.
We'll do it again one more time for those
WHO are not in the room.
We're going to do a synchronous clap, and
it's just a one clap, and we'll do it until
we get it right. So, part of my
instruction, we're going to do this.
Clap once, if you can hear me, perfect,
wonderful.
Thank you for joining us this morning.
I see that folks are still streaming in.
I, again, encourage folks to also fill out
the front.
We don't bite over here. And thank you for
being here on time as well.
I know that there are many things going
on.
You could be anywhere else in New York, but
you chose to be here with us on DPI Day.
So, welcome to DPI Day.
The second, I understand, DPI Day at the
UN Open Source Week.
Open Source Week is co-hosted by the UN
Office of Digital andEmerging Technologies
as well
as the Office of ICT.
We also have member state hosts WHOare
Tanzania,Lesotho,Morocco,Jamaica
Dominican Republic
Estonia, and Luxembourg.
I also want to acknowledge and
advance how the ministerial participation
will have this
morning, which is exciting about a topic
like this one.
And I, myself, am your host for today.
I can be your rabble razza.
I can be the one WHO ashes you into places,
but I'm hoping that we'll have a good time.
My name is Nanjira Sambuli.
I am a senior advocacy officer on digital
public infrastructure and
inclusive financial
systems at the Gates Foundation.
So, some things about this day.
This is day three of a long week
but it's exciting once again to see the
room has filled
out, considering yesterday I hear it was a
very filled out house.
Day one on Monday,there was a hackathon
and then yesterday was an exciting open
source
and AI session.
And today's DPI day,which is aiming to
bring together the open source and
DPI communities
together and to help advance through that
the global digital compact commitments.
As for our agenda today, we're going to start
with an opening fireside chat followed by
a ministerial panel.
But then we're going to move around
intosome breakout sessions before lunch
have enough
time for lunch where you could also get to
know each other better, and then we'll have
another breakout session after lunch, then
come back into this room for a closing panel
and a closing ceremony.
Not to worry, we'll keep emphasizing these
as we go along throughout the day.
And the most important part, there will be
a reception for those WHO have the ticket
for that.
Now,the next thing I want to point out is
a UN digital corporation portal that
has been
put together by Odette.
So those
I want to actually find out if folks can
let's do some live participation here
by scanning that QR code and getting some
thumbs up that folks have reached a portal.
Somebody took a picture and I don't know
that that's what they were meant to do.
So you can read, what this portal is about
is that you can register the initiatives you
have in your respective areas of work and
link them to the global digital compact for
visibility whenthe compact is being
reviewed
and it's also a chance to showcase your
work
on a global platform and portal.
Just checking, we have good thumbs up, little
thumbs up that we have the link, perfect.
Thank you, sir. Active participation
welcomed.
So just some housekeeping rules before we
get intothe day,no food and
drink are allowed
but your water bottles are safe.
I had to confirm that one.
You pay foryour own meals in the cafeteria
areas on the third floor where
you have lunch
or coffee and all the fourth floor, sorry.
And so to move around, as I mentioned, to the
breakout sessions and otherwise there will
be volunteers outside in yellow t-shirts
WHOcan help you move from
room to room depending
on the sessions that you want to get to.
And with that, ladies and gentlemen, I'm
hoping that we'll have a great day together.
I am just looking around the room to make
sure that
I can hand over to the next session.
Oh, and now our moderator is arriving in
Grandfash, and we welcome a sheer RISE.
I will now hand over to Ms.
Yolanda Martinez, WHO will be joining us
shortly here for the
opening fireside session.
Yolanda, welcome very much.
Thank you so much, and good morning
everyone is an honor to be here.
I truly respect this setting,especially
for
the vote in one entire week to open source
topic. And within that week, an entire day
of discussions for DPI.
So welcome to this initial session.
And to get started,I would like to bring
two amazing leaders to join me for
this conversation.
Number one, I'm sorry because literally I
was running to get started on time.
And Ms.
Lisa Lipakosta,did I pronounce your last
name correctly,welcome Minister of Justice
and Digital Affairs of Estonia.
Thank you so much.
And I would also like to give the floor, I
don't see here, Minister Sigmund Freil from
the Dominican Republic.
Maybe he's running like I was literally,
no, let's give a couple of minutes.
And to get everyone's inspired and into the
conversation, let me share a little bit of
thoughts on why talking about open source
and DPI under that framework of the global
digital compact is so important.
Number one,the compact remind all of us
that
digital transformation must be inclusive
must be trusted and must be country led.
At the World Bank,we have learned that
the most successful digital journeys are
not just
built by countries working alone,but by
countries learning fromone another and
supported by
strong partnerships.
And I would like to give you some examples
of very concrete results coming from
working
in partnerships across Latin American and
the Caribbean through IDLAC consortium, which
is a joint effort funded by the World
Bank,the Inter-American Development Bank
and CODA
itself,and the technical working groups of
the Latin American network for
the development
of e-government,Brett Hill
countries are advancing cross-border
digital identity interoperability.
And I feel so proud to share today that 83
million Brazilians can access more than 300
public services on worldwide government
portal using their global digital ID.
More than 12 countries are participating
in this effort
including Dominican Republic
which is the chair of Brett Hill this year
and will host the regional ministerial
meeting
later this year as well.
Another example of partnerships is Vincula
LAC,and forthis one
we partner in the World
Bank with Coursera to give more than 5, 000
scholarship that has been provided across
the region based on country context
andneeds,and I'm very happy to share that
more than
20,000 courses are being taken by
thatreflect more than 70
000 hours of learning in areas
such as relevant of AI service security
and digital transformation.
Another example of the power of
partnership is the LAC AI Accelerator
and I know Estonia
will share a lot more on this to our
conversation
which is a partnership between the Tony
Blair
Institute,AT&T Data,and Carnegie Mellon
University,where we are working with
18 use cases coming
from an open call where
we got 59 proposals to put an idea on how
to use AI to make government
services better into action in just six
months.
And last but not least, the Women in
Gothic Challenge.
I feel very proud,because this is a
partnership between GISET
the Government of Estonia,colleagues
of ITU,the World Bank,and the DPI say
what's initiative withUN of that
that are investing
in the next generation of women leaders in
this space.
This year,the initiative graduated its
Terco heart
bringing the total number of women
supported
through mentoring,training
and networking opportunities to more than
680 participants
across the three editions.
Today,the challenge team will be hosting a
workshop at 3 p.m.
and I encourage everyone
interested in scaling women's leadership,and
I think we have a great example here
Minister
to join and learn more about this
initiative.
So these are examples of regional
engagements andglobal engagement
but we're going to
have the opportunity to this conversation
to learn about specific examples.
So we're going to be discussing around
three main areas,what work
what is underway now
and how international cooperation matters.
So to kick off the floor and looking back
at the country's DPI journey, and I'm super
fan of Estonia, because when I was the CIO
of Mexico, it was one of the first countries
I went to visit to learn andto gather
inspiration forthe digital strategy that
we put in place
after what we saw
what is the one program or reform at your
desk at this very moment
and that is moving everything around DPI,
what does the next chapter look like when
Estonia has been working with next row for
more than two decades now?
What is the priority? What are you working
on?
Thank you.
Thank you for this wonderful introduction,
and it's really a great honor to be here to
discuss on this very timely andimportant
topic,because we are very much talking
aboutopen
source AI, but you need some kind of
infrastructure around that as well.
So that is absolutely clear.
Estonia, yes, is a country with 100% of
public services digital.
Everything is connected via a very
important infrastructure point
the personal or company
code,but also the interoperability between
more than 3,000 different databases
so one
of our political decisions has been thatwe
never built a super database because
everything
should be built on trust and
super database is not a good answer if you
are looking for
a trust.
So you asked what is the one most
important thing at my table right now
and this is still
the inclusion.
So when Estonia as a country has achieved
already 100% digital governments, then now
going to the next era, that is the AI
governance, that is fundamentally different.
So basically we are at the same place
whereall the countries are
despite our previous
digital journey,we are richer withour
experiences,but we are building new things
withAI.
And that means now again that nobody
should left behind.
So we have this principle at the United
Nations
but we have this principle also in our
country.
And that means that with a hello.
So having the AI for everybody, nobody left
behind, it means that we have to make new
political decisions, let me give some
examples, and these are not technological ones.
These are political ones, first we have
Prime Minister-led initiative, Estonia.
AI, actually
you find it AST.
AI at our own language, and that is, has
every week sessions for absolutely
every sector in the society describing and
helping how you could use AI.
So we have a program together withour
public libraries
every village has a public library
and we do not train librarians already from
1990s, or we have information specialists
because you don't need even a single
gadget in Estonia to be a member of digital
society
because you can get all the digital services
frombanking to the state services from
the
public libraries.
Now we proceed the librarians helping the
village people without any gadgets to
understand
what AI is, how it can change your life.
Maybe you could be part of that, maybe you
choose otherwise.
So literally no one is left behind.
So I consider personally this because I'm
very keen on equality issues.
I personally consider this asmost
important technological solution
which is absolutely
not technological, that really no one is
left behind.
And we also include children.
So many countries in the world are
discussing banning social media for kids.
Estonia has made the choice otherwise
because
we have very high results at our PISA
tests.
We are doing very well in education.
And this is becausewe have included
digital learning already from
the very first grades
but also some knowledge already fromthe
kindergarten
with a state curriculum to everybody.
So no child is left behind.
We have AI leap at schools.
That means thatalready all teachers have
got access to AI together with
the researchers
but also the kids get gradually full access
to AI, not to be only the best users, but
to be the best creators of AI, to be the
best critical thinkers on the era of AI.
So these are just some of the examples.
I would love to share also the
technological things,but forme,as you ask
what is most
important? One thing for me, and that is
inclusion and that nobody is left behind.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
I feel very inspired andmaybe you can
elaborate a little bit more,especially because
education
is a very challenging sector.
In most of our countries,I can speak
fromLatin America,from Mexico that
has 129 million
people, 25 million children, how you engage
with unions and teachers to incorporate AI
in a way that is an incentive and a way to
scale the capabilities in working with the
kids.
There's a little bit more aboutthat
negotiation that
usually comes at the political level.
Actually the situation in Estonia is vice
versa.
So first,our principle fordigital services
andAI is not that
government controls people
but people control government with a data
tracker and all the other tools available.
And that's the same with the schools and
teachers.
So the initiative actually did not come
politically.
It came from the teachers, from the
schools.
So we have a very independent teacher
system in Estonia
which actually elaborates a lot
of different initiatives.
And it is the teachers WHOactually lead
the program together withthe academia and
universities.
So teachers have free hands to, the
government only gives access.
We only pay for the access.
But all the rest is done by the teachers
together with academia.
And we very much support the different
initiatives.
This is actually the ambience we have here
at this week that
when different people come
together, we get better solutions.
And that is the same with the teachers in
Estonia.
When different teachers,in different
schools,in remote schools,city schools
different
languages, put their ideas on the table
experiment.
And we have also very supportive
university side, research side for that.
Also the brain research, development
research.
So together, the academia and the teachers
are developing co-creating the new ways of
learning and politicians do not intervene.
So that is what I truly believe in.
That the initiative from different people
is the breaking point for new innovations.
The only thing thatthe government does
andhas done throughout the years is that
Estonian
government is basically a risk-taking
government research based on research
based on very severe
risk assessment, but we are open to
co-creation and research-based innovation.
Thank you.
I found extremely interesting,this
approach of governance,really working with
the teachers
and giving them the space to define the
how.
The teachers are working with the
government.
I would put it that way. Perfect.
No.
Thank you forsharing thatexperience andI'm
sure many authorities here
but also represent
that is from different sectors, feel
inspired and ready to test these ideas.
Thank you for sharing that.
And welcome, Minister. Thank you for
joining us.
Another country thatis a champion in Latin
America andthe Caribbean
I was sharing with
the audience at the beginning the example
of Edelach andthe amazing work that
the consortium
is doing, allowing country teams to define
the priorities on how to integrate into the
regional IT broker and the important role
of Dominican Republic sharing data out this
year and hosting the ministerial meeting.
So I would like to give you the floor to
also share with
the audience what is the top priority
the top policy thatis right now at your
desk andhow AI is moving everything and
how Dominican
Republic is embracing this AI approach.
We learned from Estonia, a very interesting
way to allow co-creation but providing the
right elements of risk, teachers and
government working together.
What is the journey in the Dominican
Republic?
Well,the morning first,thank you,Yolanda
and
then my greetings to Minister Pacosta and
to all the delegates are here today in
this open source week.
As you mentioned,the Dominican Republic
right now is in a very,let's say
sensible moment.
We are, as a government since 2020, one
president of another took office.
He made a decision and took the path that
we have to transfer the whole D.
R.
government
including the digitalization anddigital
transformation asa transversal,let's say
step andmandatory.
We have been working a lot,not only in
digitizing the whole government
not only creating interoperability
but also how to adapt intoa world in
whichevery day AI is more active
it's more present
and it's more mandatory to be involved in
all public service thatwe offer as
a country.
As you mentioned,Yolanda
we have been working in trying to
integrate in this ecosystem in
the whole Latin America region
andCaribbean and
trying to be one of the leaders in that
area.
We have to, the first three or two years
in our government, try to create the, let's
say,the governance in the whole country
regarding how we have to adapt and
how we will produce
this ecosystem, because when we arrived in
2020, we didn't have any, like a clear path
or a clear state
how the governance of digital transformation
should be in the public sector.
And we,the President of Ben Affair,has
made various executive decisions in which
it had
established clearly,which is the governance
representing the government itself with
our
Minister of Public Administration
WHO has the leadership in this case in all
these actions.
And then after that,we have been working
in several multilateral organizations in
let's
say, in three ways. First, interoperability,
that's very important for us.
We have been dealing a lot withhow the
institutions were structured separately and
they were working
each one withtheir own data andtheir
system,and their goal was at thatpoint and
it was
not a easy way to start it,that how we
have to interpret and
create this one ecosystem
in the whole public service andto make
them understand that
the information is not owned
by them,but it's owned by the people
andit's owned by the government itself as
a whole.
So that was a process in which we have to
change the cultural vision and belief of the
incumbents and
all the public officers in the Dominican
Republic to compromise in that
vision.
We signed,like,one year ago,a very
important pact with
what we call the Junta Central electoral
government,that's the national identity
office of the Dominican Republic WHO
in order that
all the public government offices in the
Dominican Republic can be interoperability
we had them
priority with the Junta and has all the
information about the Dominican citizens.
We didn't even have that as a government,
we didn't have, like, a central information
and how to get any data regarding any
Dominican citizen in the Dominican Republic.
So that's one of the first steps that we
made and we have advanced a lot in the last
12 months in that part.
Second, last week, we signed, oh, we started
the Innovation Center with partnership with
NVIDIA,is this the first Innovation Center
in the whole Caribbean and
I think also Latin
American in whichwe are creating the
ecosystem withthe government
with the private sector
and also withthe academia in whichto start
building this,well,capabilities from
students
from teachers, with the certifications of
NVIDIA and with also private companies that
will be partners withthe government in the
Innovation Center
trying to create this ecosystem
in which we can develop AI not only for the
public sector but also how to impact in the
private sector.
Also we have worked a lot in what we call
the, well, the DPIs public infrastructure.
The president of NVIDIA just is,I think
next week we will
he will publish a new executive
order in which structuring all the DPI
public infrastructure that we don't have.
We still have it in the Dominican Republic
in order not only to create the
governance
but also how we will handle and
manage all this infrastructure in
Dominican in the country
that is very important to keep going and
advance.
So I think we have many,still we have many
things to still work ahead but
right now we
think thatwe are in a great moment in
which
first we have transformed the whole
cultural
vision of the public service of how we must
intervene with these platforms, with this
DPI infrastructure,with AI,almost,and
second also we have also made as
a debate in the
whole country thatthe public service is
going to be better if we adapt and
we create and
we incorporate AI to the actual,to the
mandatory,to the most common service that
we offer
in the Dominican Republic as health,
education, and other things.
We are working in what we call the
proactive service.
We will launch it in November this year or
on top of this year in which
we will create
as Estonia already has and
all the countries in the world how we
anticipate to the needs
of the citizens, how we, by cell phones, by
any other technological device, we can not
defy the many citizens that you have, like
to go to the hospital, which hospital you
have to go, you have to, which is the school
that you will be placing your children's,
how to renew your license,things like
thatwe are
we are going to launch it in November
as we call the proactive service,so also
we have
we have received a lot of collaboration
from Estonia and we thank you for that.
So I think we are in a good place right
now,the Dominican Republic is not only
we have
the goal to transfer the Dominican
Republic,not only asa tourism place thatwe
everybody
sees us, but also a technological country.
That's very inspiring and congratulations
because you have a lot on the table, running
a same mindset within the cabinet and put
it interoperability at the service of the
citizens, put in the right executive order
in place to frame it from a legal certainty
point of view,but also creating an AI
ecosystem thatallowed co-creation as
Estonia was also
sharing on the case,in the sector of
education and
positioning such a beautiful country as
a digital hub, as an innovation hub for
the region.
And I think thatsets a very good intro
forthe second round in this conversation
which
is around international cooperation and why
spaces like this matter so much and maybe
now we are going to start thatway around
and
if you can elaborate a little bit more
dimension
and you thank Estonia,I also express my
gratitude forall the learnings I got when
I was leading
Mexico National Digital Strategy
but if you both elaborate on how
international cooperation
had shaped the digital journey that each of
your countries are currently taken, if you
can share it since this is DPI day andwe
run over the principles of modularity
reusability
understand our base,what solution idea you
have to take fromanother countries
how regional
engagements andregional and
global initiatives have played a role in
how you are shaping
and implementing and scaling your digital
transformation journeys.
Well
for the Dominican Republic it had been
very important in the collaboration of not
only countries like Estonia, but also in
the multilateral sector.
First, I want to repeat
again thatwe thank Estonia becausethey are
helping us withthe X-road platform and
also
in areas like cyber security.
They are very important for us that we are
trying to improve
and Estonia are collaborating with us in
the last few months with that.
Also, we have a
very good relationship withthe Emirates
thatare helping us also in digitalizing and
transformation
in some services in the Dominican Republic
like immigration and education teams.
Also,
we have the war bank and
the IBD has been very active in the
Dominican Republic in the
last two or three years withour ministers
andworking with
first the IBD trying to create
this whole ecosystem and
clear governance path in the Dominican
Republic in the digital
perspective.
We have a program for almost very million
dollars with the IBD.
We are right
now working in first in creating in the
ministry itself as a leader.
This culture about how
the digital transformation should be taken
how we can also reflect it on our brothers
and our colleagues and our partners in the
public sector.
Also, we are creating the first
time in the Dominican Republic with the
support of the IBD.
We didn't have a central platform
that, let's say, centralize all the human
research and all the public service in the
Dominican Republic of functionalities and
how we provide the services.
So, we are right
now withvery advanced in thatprocess and
we should have it finalized by the end of
the
year trying to cooperate all the entities
in the Dominican Republic to operate
through
this platform. With the war bank, we are
in the process of modernization. As we call
it,it's a program,it's a very important
program thatwe have over there,which include
as
I mentioned before, right now what we call
the proactive service and other initiatives
that we are working withthe war bank
including capabilities,also the matter of AI
which
we just launched two weeks ago,the first
program in AI forpublic service,2
000 scholarships
for 2, 000.
It was amazing.
The whole public service wanted to
participate in that program.
So that reflects the interest that the
public service has in this matter.
So, for us, without
the cooperation of countries like Estonia,
like the Emirates, without the cooperation,
the multilateral organization like the war
bank,IBD andalso in this spaces
it is almost
very difficult to achieve what we have
achieved at this point.
So, we support, that's why we
have been coming here every time thatyou
invite us because
it's very important to receive
also experience fromcountries thatalready
have done this path
that years ago have done
this what we are doing in the Dominican
Republic.
So, it's a good place to not only to
receive
the good experience, but also the mistakes
that you have made so we can solve it and
not do it also as a country.
Thank you.
They're inspiring and now from Estonia,
but a quick recap on what you kindly
share, concrete example, XROAT.
So, for anyone in the room that would like
to follow up on
their experience, the minister is here with
his team, but also the role of multilateral
development banks and we're doing also a
lot of work.
There is a session this afternoon
on DPI financing.
We're working a lot on creating knowledge,
products, best practices
on how to procure. So, reach out into the
different events today and Estonia.
Why digital cooperation matters so much.
Thank you and thank you for the very good
words.
Thank you so much.
And we are really
hoping for a continuous, very good
cooperation.
So, yeah, starting from XROAT, so this is
basically an architecture forinteroperability
thatis both extremely cyber secure
but at
the same time very well suitable forthe AI
era aswell because
it has basically the computing
capacities in between.
And it is an open source.
So, if anybody wants to use it, there are
already many countries, but also many
organizations WHO use it.
So, and because it's an open source,
it is a very good opportunity to at least
think about it.
Estonia with this XROAT experience
has showed thatwhen one government has a
good experience with
an open source solution
it is a trustable way for other
governments also to proceed.
And that saves a lot of money.
That saves a lot of time, but also it
saves the mistakes.
I was very fond that you mentioned
it becauseI think one of the strengths of
Estonia is thatwe are open with
our mistakes
and it is maybe good to work withus
because
we really tell honestly what didn't work
out
for us and what did.
And because of this open source matters so
much, we get also good information
back from other countries.
Every country invents something new on
that and that helps us also
to build new details on the existing.
We are one of the grounders of GovStack.
GovStack
is basically shared architecture
possibility between governments and
that is again very important
not only forthe cybersecurity,not only
forthe trustable solutions
but it is very important also
to save the money of the taxpayers formuch
more fun things like education,healthcare
andso on.
So we have shared architecture portal
within Estonia
but we also share internationally andwe
really see thatfor a small country like
Estonia is,it is very important that
we co-create,that
we learn fromeach other andthat really
enables us to offer the most important thing
the trustable
secure, best ever services for our
citizens at the lowest cost possible.
So the international
corporation,the international sharing
even if it is just the technical sharing
of architecture
it is extremely effective for all these
goals to be fulfilled.
And the third thing I would like
to mention is the trust within the
cybersecurity issues that you also mentioned.
We are living in
the world where
cybersecurity is every minute more
important than it was the last minute.
We see
that the good countries are using the
wonderful possibilities we are talking here
all about
but we also see thatthere are bad guys out
there and
we see the huge growing amount of cyber
attacks
led by AI, but not only.
So this is an area where the international
corporation is extremely
valuable because we are looking back to
historical evidence that we have had.
We have got agreement
against pirates, we have got agreements
against international crime.
So this is the cybersecurity
area is the area whereUnited Nations has
given good examples,good concrete documents
andthis
work should go on because
this is something every cyber attack
usually has an overspill andthis
is something that no country can stand
against alone.
So for Estonia as a small democratic
country,
international
cooperation,multilateralism,law and
order internationally is extremely
important to
save the lives of our people,to save the
democracy,to keep the liberties
to keep the human rights
we are used to.
Thank you very inspiring and I think we
are fully aligned that the digital
transformation should be an enabler of human
rights andto guarantee a safe space for
everyone andto
close and to summarize.
We are in the open source week.
So what is the expectation of you as
minister
of this week andwhat will be the
recommendation for
the community on what output are we
expecting
to deliver to the global digital compact
review.
So we want to start here.
Estonia has open source
by default.
So this is our political decision has been
a political decision for
a long time because
we really see the absolutely good sides of
that.
Maybe just again underlining the
efficiency,
the cyber security,but also the
possibility to learn fromeach other and
to offer better
services to our citizens.
One thing that we are looking for very
much is that we are moving
towards international agreements on that
to the international level of
interoperability because
the world we are looking foris thatmore
andmore of our countries,for example
if we are
talking open source and DPI together are
using digital documents.
We are used to travel from one
country to another with our paper
documents.
We need international agreements to travel
with
digital documents.
This is just one example why we can't go
on alone, why we need international
cooperation on all that.
And it's not only documents.
We are building already cross border
services withmany countries sothat the one
andsame service is available from
the governments
in several countries.
And this is extremely good for the
citizens because then you can enjoy
really the best sides of every country.
It can save your health.
It is good for education,
just some examples.
And this is, let us imagine how beautiful
our world would be if we have
really functioning cross border
services,the best from
each country cross border functioning.
Thank you.
Well, actually I want first that at the
end of this week of these
two days to get a stronger sense thatDPI
and
open source community are more eager to go
from
ideas to implementation.
That's very important for us.
For the Dominican Republic, open source
is not only a matter of cost,it's also a
matter of sovereignty
it's a matter of transparency
of efficiency.
So we need that to be implemented in every
way.
And we need tools to govern,
we need tools to secure data.
So for us it's very important that the
open source get more
stronger and receive a more cooperation in
that sense.
I brought three ideas.
Last night
I want to read it.
For us it's very important.
First, production ready digital public
goods
and reference architectures that countries
can trust and adapt.
Second, practical safeguards
that can be embedded into real
implementation.
Not only discuss principles, it's very
important
for us.
And third, better cooperation between
governments as we have it.
Development partners
as we have a few also.
Funders and operational communities.
So countries like Dominican Republic
can scale safely and sustainability. For
us it's very important. And finally, I will
add one more point, financing. We need in
digital investment models and that reward
use that interoperability and national
capability.
A portal may solve one problem, but a
shared
digital rate can solve many.
On our side, Dominican Republic want to
stay true to the
commitments of the global digital
andcompact andthe part of the future through
implementations.
Our hopes is that by the end of the week,
the GEDC review, we can say that GEDC helped
countries to move from digital ambition to
digital capability.
From pilots to infrastructure
and froma fragmented project to trust a
digital public service that
improves people's lives.
I think thatthis kind of discussion is
very important forcountries as
the Dominican Republic
that they're in the path to establish.
DPI is an established open source, but we
need
more help.
We need collaborations from countries that
already have done and have more advanced
ecosystem in digital transformation. And I
think that we are in a good path. I think
we have regulators, but we need to be more
into the, let's say, to materialize things.
Discussions are good,but we have to
receive implementations
we have to receive collaborations
how to implement things.
Thank you both.
Very inspiring conversation.
I think ready to kick off the day, and if
I have to summarize all these
exchanges,this community
as international community of DPI
are committed to co-create,to provide the
right principles but
also the right approaches
to go from pilots to scaling and to make
sure that no one is left behind.
Thank you so
much, and I would like to give the floor
to Nanjira.
Thank you once again to your Landa and the
ministers for such an inspiring session.
As they're taking their picture,we're
going to have a short intermission that
allows you
to actually talk to the person next to you,
but at the same time, I want to introduce
a second QR code to you.
Across the desks, for those WHO are seated
around desks, there
is a QR code to share your feedback
forevery session that
is very much appreciated by the
organizers of this DPI day.
So as you chat with your neighbor, we'll
continue in just
five minutes.
Do take advantage of also taking a
snapshot of that QR code.
Thank you, and
we'll continue in five minutes. Thank you.
[ Pause ] [ Pause ] [ Pause ]
Hello, DPI day peeps.
Calling our room to order, I hope the five
minutes for interaction
have brought back some energy in the room.
Good.
Kindly take your seat.
We'll be continuing
with the next session shortly. Lovely. All
right. In the spirit of the day, we'll do
my little favorite thing.
Just to make sure we're now back in the
room.
We'll do it one
more time.
Clap once if you can hear me.
Wonderful.
Well, that fireside chat did bring
up something towards the end around how
we're going to do all this and
how we're going to
do it all together.
And so this panel is going to talk to us
about turning global commitments
into action.
And our moderator for this lovely session
will be the wonderful Undersecretary
General, Mr.
Almondeep Gill.
I hand over to you to take over from here.
Thank you.
Thank
you so much, Nanjira.
And good morning, everyone.
So there is a back story to Nanjira.
I don't
know if she's already mentioned it.
She was a member of the Secretary
General's high level
panel on digital cooperation.
So when DPIs, DPIs were not buzz words
like they are today.
So she helped us put together the right
framework forthinking aboutthese issues
not only
the exciting opportunities, but also the
safeguards and the community engagement.
So Nanjira,
so wonderful to have you with us.
And ladies and gentlemen, we have a most
exciting and
distinguished panel this morning.
So I will be very brief in the Global
Digital Compact
Member States made real commitments on
digital public infrastructure to invest in
them.
I
think that's very, very important.
Find the financing, mobilizing the
financing that makes
this possible at the level of countries to
build systems thatare safe,inclusive
interoperable
and rights-respecting and to treat digital
public goods as digital commons so that they
are not only serving the countries and the
communities inside of borders, but they're
also contributing to the global public
good.
So those were very, very powerful
commitments,
and we've been working hard,all of you have
been working hard to translate them into
concrete
actions.
So soon, very soon, these commitments will
be reviewed as part of the overall review
of the Global Digital Compact starting in
late 2027 and going into 2028.
So the review will
be as consequential as the actions that
preceded.
And what is discussed then will depend on
what governments, UN entities, and I'm so
delighted to be joined by Ahuna today, and
the wider ecosystem actually do in the 18
months between now and then.
So I'd ask everyone
in the room to think of this not as a panel,
but as a kind of working session that plans
ahead strategically with that review in
mind.
So we have governments on this panel, we
have
international organizations,governments
WHOmade commitments,now putting them into
practice.
And on the other hand, the institutions
with the capacity to support them.
So I'm going
to pose a question
a broad question at the start to each one
of the speakers in turn.
And thatquestion is
where does your country stand in
implementing the GDC commitments
on digital public infrastructure?
And what areas of progress would you
highlight?
And
what are the priorities for the coming 18
months? And I want to start with you. Your
excellency,Selima Manor Mahabhar,the
Minister of Communications Technology and
Innovation
of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
Thank you so much.
And for that, I would really like
to start by thanking yourself for really
organizing this week.
It's been a great session of really
enlightening conversations and look
forward to more of them.
And also, congratulations
of being able to put together fantastic
panels of all female representation.
There's no risk
of a manor here, so absolutely. Thank you
for that. And also for the opportunity for
Sierra Leone to participate and share our
experiences.
And I think more specifically,
I like what you said about
let it be a start of a conversation around
this a couple of years
of implementing the GDC.
And to see what's worked well, what
hasn't, and how we can all
plan together for that next phase of
development.
And with Sierra Leone, specifically, we
were
really excited by the adoption of the GDC
becausewe saw it as
one of those first steps
in bringing together critical stakeholders
to agree on the phase of development and
moving
beyond just the wordings of commitment
but really narrowing down to see what do
we need
to do.
So government, development partners,
private sector, and all of these elements
are critical for the digital advancement
and as we see it.
And that's why we're really
supportive of the GDC and being keen to see
how it progresses and contributes to that
development.
For Sierra Leone, a lot of focus for us
has gone into looking at the foundation
or the foundation layer as so to speak with
regards to connectivity because you can't
talk about payment, instance payment, you
can't talk about ID system and you can't talk
about interoperability without
connectivity and being there.
So far, that's been a huge
area of focus.
Over these last couple of years, we've
been focusing on advancing connectivity
coverage.
To now, we believe we're out around 90%
coverage of population of 4G coverage
within thatsignificant progress in just a
short couple of years in ensuring that
citizens
regardless of wherethey sit have access to
connectivity
we've expanded our fiber backbone
layer, we've improved on our redundancy,
we've also interconnected with our neighboring
countries becausewe also saw that
as a way to reduce the dependency within
the country
of making sure thatwe're connected throughthe
backbone to our neighboring country
the
public of Guinea, we're also making progress
to connect and with Liberia and we see all
of these as critical.
Also, progress for us has been made around
digital ID system with
the National Civil Registration Authority
making significant progress on around
I think around
80% of ID and that's been also
significant.
We're also moving now working with other
partners
to look at digital identity program of
itself andhow we ensure that
it really becomes a
single point of truth and integrating with
other government systems and as we roll out.
And really maybe in the spirit of this
being really a conversation
I think what I would
from these conversations I really think
one of the benefits for
us would be maybe to learn
from others specifically around once we
have the registration ID information how do
we really
ensure that
all other new government systems roll out
this really becomes a single point
of truth because
I think we're still at the risk of
duplicate ID programs being rolled
out across the course.
So that's for us, the area that we're
looking to tackle and improve
upon.
Progress has been made around payment
systems withour mobile money,the improvements
of our mobile money ecosystem,improvements
around digital payments
also happening with
also the roll out of the payment switch in
Sierra Leone aswell that
would support interoperability.
And then maybe I'll end by on exchange as
well.
Again, progress has been made.
The Ministry
of Finance right now is rolling out
interoperability exchange layer for
the financial sector which
we're hoping to then scale across.
We decided to go with a model of choosing
one sector to
deal withbefore we scaled up and
the finance sector being one of the most
advanced when
it comes to digital transformation.
We thought it was a good place to tackle
that there and
install of this andput all of these in
place whichthen allow us to scale that
across other
sectors and as we go along.
And maybe one of the areas which we're
also still working
on within that is around data governance
standardization.
When we think about it and how do we do
that
for the whole of government,we've been
able to think through
the ministry or the financial
sector whenwe think of the whole of
government and
how do we put those standards in place.
So once we have the infrastructure and
that those would be embedded.
So those are areas
that we're working on and the kind of
areas of our next phase of development.
But when
it comes to the DPI and the foundation or
elements, I will believe a lot of progress
has been made.
We're working with our regional partners
on cross border digital trade to
make sure thatas we're developing these
foundation,we're doing it in a way that
would ensure
that it would enable cross border digital
trade because for us that's a key area of
priority.
If we look at the Equos region with his
excellency, the president, Dr.
Julius
Madaby of Sierra Leone, currently serving
as the chair of Equos. One of his priority
areas has been for Equos to go back to its
original mandates which was the economic
integration as a critical pillar for peace
and security across the region.
So for Sierra
Leone, lots of focus has been going on.
How do we really ensure we're setting up
the standards
for cross border digital trade because we
believe that that is what we need to do to
look at the next phase of development
within the region.
But just a few experiences of
what's been happening in Sierra Leone,we
look forward to the further engagements and
collaboration.
Thank you.
Thank you, Minister.
I love the way you've stacked it up.
All the way to the regional
cooperation dimension.
And let me now turn to Professor Amma.
Morocco's experience is
one of the five largest data markets in
Africa,you know,within your own region from
your
national perspective.
Also your own expertise in this area.
So you welcome your thoughts.
Thank you very much for the introduction.
I'm on deep. Morocco is fully aligned with
the GDC endorsed by member state aspart of
the pact for
the future adopted by consensus
at the UN General Assembly in September to
24.
If I want to provide all the development
in Morocco, it would be very, very huge.
So I would prefer to give you some very
important
initiatives maybe to summarize.
So Morocco has launched the Morocco
Digital 2003-30 strategy.
This national strategy is based on two
complementary axes.
The first one is the digitalization
of public services.
And the second one is the development of
the digital economy.
So it
is driven by four cross-cutting levers,
digital talents.
We do a lot of work towards digital
talents,including young people from4 to
18,also at universities
also some categories
specific categories like women, et cetera.
The second cross-cutting lever is
artificial
intelligence which has been pushed forward
and artificial intelligence in Morocco has
its own roadmap.
Our sourcing, we do a lot of things in
outsourcing and offshoring.
To
give you just an example,in Morocco we
opened two big companies and
now we can count 1,200
foreign companies in Morocco doing
offshoring,digital export,and employing 143
000 young
people and engineers in Morocco.
As you know, Moroccan engineers are very
well targeted
in the digital market and something we are
very proud of.
And maybe the last thing is
connectivity and data infrastructure.
This is the last pillar of this strategy.
For example,
we launched the 5G network last November
and we covered already 50 cities in Morocco.
We have also covered more than 1
400 regions by 4G during the first phase
of the deployment
of this program of connectivity.
And we also invest a lot in infrastructure
from data center
and compute point of view andwe can say
thatin Morocco
if we take the data center capability
globally, we have projects that more than
1 gigawatt.
And the most important data center
is under study in the south in Dakhla
region with 500 megawatt.
So this data center is
intended to provide capacity storage but also
compute for like 20% for Moroccan country
but the 80% will be dedicated to the
neighboring Morocco in the west of Africa.
So many things
about connectivity,data
centers,compute,but maybe which
is very important also to mention
is our three structure and initiatives
underway.
The first one is the IDRITX.
O.
IDRIT in Arabic
means my administration.
And this is a platform or architecture of
interoperability connecting
multiple public administrations around a
sovereign digital identity in court to the
national
electronic identity card issued by the
general direction of national security.
This means
that we build interoperability between
administrations,all the ministers forexample
or public
administration using identity card which is
issued by this sovereign national entity.
This is very important for us because
these allow two things.
This allow in our approach
we play huge attention to two things in
all what we do in digital affairs.
The first one
is privacy by design,how to give the
protection to citizens in this huge data era
andthe second
one is security by design because
you know all the digital infrastructures
are matter of cyber attacks
today over the world andwe play a very huge
attention to preserve this security and
privacy
by design in all even in our law.
I mean in the architecture itself of our
identity we
take intoaccount these two aspects becausefrom
one hand we protect the country and
from
the other we protect also citizens in this
era of digital.
So IDRITX.
O.
X for exponential
because you know all these technologies
are exponentials is an interoperability
architecture
connecting asI said multiple public
administrations andfor now eight institution
institutional
agreement has been signed andwe work very
closely with
I will not give the name because
it doesn't mean thatmuch foryou butthe
spirit is thatwe have to work with
cyber security
office, public office, our regulator for
data protection etc.
So we are not doing this as
minister, ministry alone but we work with
four other institutions that count when it
comes to privacy and security by design.
The second framework I would like to
highlight
here is the legal framework andyou know we
do something very original I think and
very
disruptive.
We have a lot of aspects of simplification
of procedures.
So you know in many countries
that we started pushing on the table
procedures to have access to administration and
over
the years these procedures become more and
more complicated, sophisticated and there
is no design from the beginning for these
different levels of expansion for example.
So what we do is we use AI artificial
intelligence to simplify these procedures and
we can give
you more details if interested because it's
very important to clean the scene, to have
new procedures whilekeeping the function
of old procedures but
to do it in a very clean
way and while introducing AI and new
techniques to do it.
So this legal framework is something
very important thatsupport also my
administration x.0 and
we propose local digital x.0 because
it supports identity x.0 to provide all the
mechanisms for simplification but also for
the protection of the country and also the
citizens.
Maybe one more initiative is the
network of Justery Institute andthis is a
very important forus at least
a very important
initiative because Justery as you know is a
researcher that lives in 12th century, it's
somebody WHO created the first automata in
the world. It is considered as the first
robotician in the world but
beside the name Justery Institute is a
physical space where
we put
researchers,start-upers,stakeholders,administrations and
schools to create the huge
ecosystem to develop the solutions andto
solve a real world
the problems are the issues
that we face in our daily life.
So we have in Morocco 12 regions and we
have one institute
of excellence per region and
in this in each center or institute of
excellence we have
this whole ecosystem thatwork closely to
solve to provide solutions and
to solve problems
and as a ministry we fund these
institutes.
For example, we have schools like U code
for
those WHO know 42 schools in Europe, Nicole
Carandu and this kind of things but we have
also schools dedicated to civilian
servants,to doctors,to physicians
et cetera because
today if we want that AI go ahead, we need
of course infrastructure, we need talents
but we need talents across the whole
disciplines
not only talents at the university because
when they want to work on AI they need to
understand the problems of the physicians,
of the engineers, et cetera.
So in our idea it is very important to
bring these courses
also to everybody depending on the
expertise and
for example civilian servants will not
use AI to digitalize the administration if
they are not comfortable with that.
So that
is the idea andit started of course we
also push for
the development of these solutions
and we provide the whole necessary
infrastructure like data center
like clusters like GPU,et
cetera, et cetera.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yes.
So I really appreciate Minister,
the reference to the compute anddata
center infrastructure,all of Africa
just one person
of the global data center capacity and
this new project would add significantly
to that
capacity andalso the references thatyou
made to security and
the development of cross-domain
talent so necessary for the AI turn. Thank
you so much and now we will go to another
very important and exciting region and that
is the Caribbean Minister Audrey Marx, your
reflections please.
Thank you, Under Secretary and moderator,
Secretary Gill.
Excellencies,
ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Jamaica's moved beyond mere commitment and
is now firmly
in the implementation phase of our digital
public infrastructure journey.
We are actively
converging our foundational building blocks
including the national identification
card
the Jamaica data exchange platform andour
national identification and
registration center
with 24 access for citizens.
We are really put a focus on the data
exchange platform to
ensure data sharing and
the most exciting part of what we are
doing now is also building
out our national broadband network.
It is currently designed to represent a
transformative
national investment thatis expected to
connect up to 2
768 government locations including schools
while extending our high speed broadband
access to approximately 490
000 homes across Jamaica
including 140, 000 households in
underserved communities.
This initiative was significantly
strengthened digital inclusion,expand
access to opportunity and
help bridge Jamaica's connectivity
divide.
The government has also just recently in
April signed with the Trans-America's fiber
system for a new subsea cable into
Jamaica.
This will dramatically increase Jamaica's
internet speed up to 20 terabits.
So we are focusing on connectivity with
the new subsea
cable to expand broadband bandwidth, improve
redundancy and lower costs into a cohesive
national digital stack.
We are further building a digital document
wallet for electronically
storing verifiable credentials, reducing
the need to reply on paper-based records.
This
transformation is designed to deliver
tangible citizen value
reducing bureaucracy through
once-only service delivery andensuring
thatdigital transformation translates into
a seamless
trusted experience for all Jamaicans.
So we have now, for this year or financial
year,
we have spent over $100 million to build
out these systems and
looking ahead our priorities
are to integrate this stack intoa single
national framework
expand our online service
catalogue andbuild the public sector
capacity necessary to transform these systems
fromindividual
projects into a seamless citizen
experience. Thank you, Mr. Madarita.
Thank you very much, Minister, for that
valuable perspective from your region.
So we have heard
from ECOWARS, the Maghreb region, the
Caribbean, and now we will go to Central Asia.
Minister,
you have to flow. Thank you so much, Mr.
Gill, your excellency,
your guest.
Yeah, I'm representing Karsten, it's a
country of the Central Asia.
We also
have the sum achievements in the
government platform.
For example, our rating in UNDP
and UN development and index is to date
24.
And our government platform, it's included
the top nine platform in the world.
But it's one question we clearly
understand.
And today
I try to just share our vision.
And I think we, if we make and work
together, we try to
our cooperation.
And many countries have already made a
significant progress in building digital
service platforms and digital public
infrastructure.
The more important question is what comes
next.
We increasingly see digital public
infrastructure as a foundation.
The real purpose of digital
transformation is not simply to digitalize
government
it's to change the relationship
between the citizens and the state.
For decades, governments have been
organized around institutions,
administrative boundaries,but the people
do not leave their lives through
institutions.
They experience lives through the events,
the needs and moments.
The true opportunity
of technology is to make governments adapt
to people's lives rather than requiring
people
to adapt the government process.
That is why we believe that the next stage
of the EA
native government, it's when not government
that simply after might exist in processes,
not government that becomes more responsive,
more proactive, and more human centered.
For the last few decades, we have been
building digital states.
Perhaps the next decade should
be about the connecting them.
Today, data, documents, and digital
services often stop
at the national borders.
Even through people, businesses, trade,
and ideas do not.
If we
can build trusted digital bridges between
countries,we can reduce frictions
actual rate economic
cooperation,facilitate mobility
and make public services more accessible
across borders.
In this sense,the future of the digital
transformation,it's not only about
connecting people to
the digital world.
It's also about connecting digital states
to one another.
For us, there
is a two key message.
First, digital public infrastructure
should evolve into a native
government.
It's truly centered around the people.
And the second, the next of international
cooperation may be building trusted
digital between our countries.
Thank you for your
attention.
Thank you very much, Minister Bhaktaar.
The example you brought in of connecting
digital states, like that's a very
powerful one.
There is a similar digital bridge between
Estonia and Finland when it comes to
digital health.
So this is really, and Minister, you
refer to it in the context of the digital
trade
where the African continent is trying
to build common shared digital economy
thatgives scale to entrepreneurs and
also facilitates
the life of individuals in our
increasingly globalized world.
So I'm going to now turn
to my dear colleague,Ahuna,assistant
secretary general fromUNDP and
newly appointed under
secretary general for the office of
African affairs.
Ahuna, you've heard from the ministers
and often countries turn to UNDP. So UNDP
is the partner that supports member states
in turning these commitments, the GDC
goals into local delivery.
So how do you react to
what you've heard fromthe ministers and
how does UNDP respond to what comments are
asking
for? Thank you so much, Ahman Deep. It's a
pleasure really to be here. And you know,
just listening to the conversation,I,for
those of us WHO
have worked in the development
world for so long and have imagined a future,
a world, have dreamed of this world where
everyone has enough, where needs are met.
And listening today, I thought, actually
that
world we just previously imagined and
dreamed of, that future is possible.
And it's not
only possible as a distant wish that will
happen someday, it is happening now. This,
you know, hope today is a very rare
commodity.
But in this room, we are embracing,
witnessing,
hope unfold before us in a world that is
not given to that.
And I am so thrilled to hear
what I've heard from the ministers here
today.
I want to add three more countries to this
list.
In Tanzania, we have now the national
instant payments, which called tips, which
processes over 450 million transactions
worth over $12 billion in just a single year
was
just a fraction before this, this time.
And we look at Rwanda, which has launched
the
rumble platform.
And that has brought over 100 public
services, just think about that
for a second, online.
And this is fundamentally transforming how
rural people interact with
the estate.
And then you look at Nigeria, the most
populous country on the African continent,
which has scaled its national identity
register to over 100 million people.
I think these
are really powerful signals of what is
possible.
Yet, we know that this picture is uneven
across
the African continent, for instance.
And there is so much more that needs to be
done, I guess.
That's why we're having the conversation.
The reality is that African countries, for
instance, continue to struggle with a set
of common yet often invisible challenges.
The
challenges of trust,for instance
which is really key in everything we're
talking about
but also coordination and knowledge.
And these frictions turn into invisible
costs that are
born by everyday citizens.
Imagine that we have over 500 million, if
we have over 500
million people WHO lack a verifiable
identity.
It means every basic transaction will
store.
It means that they cannot access credit.
They cannot save.
They cannot access insurance.
All the services that they are owed.
So that is for us a development silencer.
When public
service delivery operates in paper based
donor funded silos
coordination becomes painfully
slow and quite leaky.
Wasting the very resources that we need at
a moment when development
financing is also declining and every
dollar must count.
And when we are navigating public
services, requiring dealing with fragmented
data or expensive intermediaries, knowledge
stops being an equalizer.
It becomes a structural barrier that's
keeping ordinary entrepreneurs
and small businesses locked out of their
own digital economy.
So digital ID, interoperable
data and AI built on safe and inclusive DPI
foundations as we've been hearing hold the
key to removing some of these barriers.
And I think UNDP has really committed on
this,
working withAfrican countries andother
countries and
the entire DPI ecosystem to build safe
inclusive and deeply trusted DPI embedded
with robust data privacy safeguards.
And we
think this has to be done fromdesign,from
the design stage through
to the national development
elaboration.
It shouldn't be an afterthought.
And our analysis shows that the single
biggest
blocker to achieving this vision actually
achieving it at scale is not the lack of
political
will.
As we've heard, every government that's
spoken, the will is there.
It's the lack of
structural financing andinnovative
financing
but also investment-ready national
projects.
And that's where we come in.
And this week, we're excited to be
launching a new initiative,
which is our Africa Accelerator for DPI.
And the idea here is really to work with
countries
over the next 18 months in an intensive
partnership that timed to the global review.
And in creating
a platform, and the platform will provide
a structured pathway for digital readiness
diagnostics. It will mobilize specialized
technical expertise and actively build the
pipelines of investment-ready projects
that
are required to unlock available sovereign
and concessional finance.
Everyone says capital is not the issue.
It's not the problem.
It
exists.
But how do we unlock it for initiatives
like this?
And that's what the question that
will be answering through this platform.
And this is designed explicitly as a
structured
platform forall ecosystem players to
engage withus so
that we can actually work collectively
within countries and finally stop driving
these critical foundations as uncoordinated,
fragmented pilots.
These are not pilots anymore.
The infrastructure of the future is being
built
right now.
And I think we have to make sure it is
built right.
But also, we have to make
sure that it's built for everyone.
That's where UNDP's heart is right now.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE] Thank you, Ahuna.
And you put your finger on these critical
blockers financing
technical capacity, institutional readiness,
and really value our partnership with UNDP
on the DPI safeguards framework and
these initiatives aimed at unlocking
innovative financing.
So you've heard the panel.
We are going to skip the next round and go
straight to Q&A
because this is a conversation and we want
to hear from you.
So perhaps two questions
from the audience, and then we come back
for a final reflection.
And please keep these
questions brief, so no speeches. Keep them
very specific and address the issues that
our panelists have raised.
The floor is open.
I see one hand there at the back.
Usman,
if you can help, yes, you got your mic
switched on. Madam, you have the floor.
Hi, can you hear me?
Thank you so much for this, for all the
information you've shared.
It's really inspiring to see countries
thatsometimes you consider small but
have achieved
so much.
So my question is around governance.
I was really looking forward to hearing
some
more.
In addition to what you've already shared
is what were your challenges when
implementing
governance using open source? And how did
you work around it? Because I'm sure this
is a topic on many people's minds. Thank
you.
Thank you so much for that.
You've set the standard for a brief
pointed question.
Next
one over there, Anir, please call from the
mic.
Thank you very much.
Very inspiring set
of discussions.
I was particularly inspired by hearing
about institutional issues and
also what I would call incentive type of
issues.
So why would I do this for specific public
servants, politicians, and also private
sector?
So institution and incentives.
And it's also
very taken by the wonderful minister from
Morocco talking about how AI is being used
for process simplification.
I would like to hear about how you're
addressing the institutional
legacy barriers using AI and incentive
issues using AI.
Because I think it's the way of
the future,using AI fordesign of institutions
anddesign of digital transformation.
I wanted
to know a bit more.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
So those two issues, governance and
then institutional design incentives
around that.
And the question was asked by someone
WHO knows how that worked in Bangladesh.
Minister, your reflection about how
different ministries
needed to come together andstart
appreciating the need to move away from
siloed investments
in vendor-driven, vendor-specific
technologies. Maybe we can start with you.
Thank you very much.
And definitely thank you for that
question.
And definitely appreciate
the question because in Sierra Leone, this
is something we've tackled with as well and
had to really think through.
Specific for a country WHO's a founding
member of the DPGA
WHO has long committed to the
opportunities and
the potential of open source to accelerate
our digital transformation agenda.
It's something at the ministry I've been
grappling with.
How do we also ensure that's a
cross-government?
This is reflected, this position is
reflected.
So what we ended up doing was to actually
have and
develop an open source first policy
supported by our partners at UNICEF.
It's been really critical for us because
even though
this has been a government on the cold
end,the policy position
but I think really detalling
it down to a policy document that's adopted
by Cabinet,it's been critical because
I think
what we also try to engage withother
government institutions is open source first
doesn't
mean open source must.
What we're communicating is to see where
there's an open source alternative
and we're ensuring thatgovernment
considers thatand explores that
option instead of going
immediately to the proprietary-based
solution.
So we've been able to get this adopted
with
the Ministry of Finance,with our public
procurement agency,as well as
our audit agency because
we see it as a way once this has been
embedded within their process as well.
They also help
us enforce it because one of the things we
know with some of these policies sometimes
if you don't have an enforcement mechanism,
sometimes it could get ignored. So we've
been able to do that and we're working
towards that.
But I think it also leads towards the
question you were asking around institutions
and how do we ensure that we work through
institutions and adoption and more for
this.
So the experience within this has been
really
critical in understanding how do we work
across other government agencies to get
buy-in for
that.
One of the things that we'll be able to do
around this, we have a digital government
legislation.
Again, within that we're establishing a
digital development agency because one of
the things we've recognized when
it comes to the procurement of digital
services sometimes
re-institution kind of wants to run and do
their own thing.
So we're just ensuring that
we have regulations around how we manage and
procure these digital services and making
sure thatwe're really looking out for
some of the critical elements at the
Ministry considers
that we must, you know, invite.
So governance, the governance aspects of
technology has been
critical.
I think rightly so, technology always
moves faster than the Lord does.
I think that's
just how it happens in every society.
We usually are catching up with governance
and regulations
always coming behind, which is not a bad
thing.
It's good to see how sometimes it plays
out
instead of, and not let regulation stifle
progress.
But they are also critical.
So we're working
towards to make sure thatour regulation
catches up with
the digital advancement that's happening.
Thank you.
I think when it comes to institutions,
which is very important, is to conduct the
change, to say, okay, you have procedures.
These procedures have been built over the
years.
And now we,like in software,for example,you
can use,you can add codes,so codes and
codes.
And at given moment, you have to clean the
whole thing.
And in our procedures, there
are two things.
This accumulation of various layers over
the years, but also some simplification,
legal simplifications, relaxation of some
constraint.
For example, in Morocco, for many
decades,you had to provide a document
thathas been certified
we call it legalization
certified by another entity.
This kind of legalization disappears with
digital, because
if the document is issued by the
administration,so that's the proof that
the document is original.
No need to go to another third institution
to get it legalized.
So this is, for example,
just an example of how we can relax some
constraint in these procedures.
In many procedures, we
moved from six days, if you want to do it
as usual, to 20 minutes, without moving to
any administration, only digitally by
digital procedures.
Something very important is, we
work on, we explain, everybody knows, that
there is a resilience index.
And this resilience
index is also applied to the
administration.
So if you want that, for example, to get
the
service in a very short time, you have to
adopt some technologies.
You have to adopt storage.
You have to have compute, et cetera.
So what we do is we explain to
administration that
the resilience is also a matter of using
new technologies andusing and
having the necessary
infrastructure.
So it works more or less.
In some countries, they just cut the
finance
of the administration.
It's not yet the case in Morocco.
And I think we will not be able
to cut money.
But it's a way to enforce those.
But we are not taking this direction,
which
we try to,we create some network of,at the
level
we take responsibility of all
administrations.
We have meetings, we conduct this change
by explaining things.
For example, we have some
lectures, some master class for how to
move to cloud, how to digitalize.
Sometimes we
provide also tools to process documents in
Morocco.
We have built-in official documents
for all the laws,et cetera
which is right now in a big book
everywhere in the administration.
Now it is digitalized.
How many scares, I think, until 12 years
digitalization of this document?
So when people see that the game time, the
game effort, they improve the service, there
is no, they are not against the change.
But we have to show exactly where they
have, they
take benefit.
And of course, administration is always
very heavy.
They want to provide
service as secure as possible.
This is why at, in my first intervention,
I said security
and privacy by design are very important
in particular in administration. I think.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
The incentives go down to the level of
citizens as well.
Thank
you for those valuable perspectives.
Maybe just one thing.
Yes, please.
If I can.
There
are two things we take care of, is dignity
of citizens and illiteracy.
You know, we talk
about technology,emerging technology
like we have everybody is able to use
technology.
Everybody is able to interact with
So in our administration, we develop
chatbots,
for example, for illiterate women or men.
And we take care of this dignity, because
if
we don't have,we have to think of this
digital divide
which is more or less present depending
on the countries in Morocco, we still have
30% in the countryside that cannot read or
write. So we have to take this, if we want
to implement all these ideas, we have to,
of course, to form talents, but also to, in
some situation, you have to provide tools.
You cannot send them to school again, some
part of the population.
So this is something
dignity is the motto in our approach.
Inclusion by design.
Thank you, Minister.
Minister Marx,
your final reflections, please. Yes. So I
wanted to share, Mr. moderator,
but in Jamaica,the approach was to literally
transform government fromthe very top.
So
the new mini-strelated lead of
efficiency,innovation and
digital transformation by policy
the Prime Minister has put this ministry
to cut across all government agencies
ministries
and departments.
So I think that policy imperative is
important in giving the authority to have
real digital transformation in countries.
The second thing that we have done, but
since
we are, I mean, our office now, is that we
have implemented the Jamaica data exchange
platform.
And as I mentioned earlier, this data
exchange platform is really our major
foundation initiative because
it allows authorized government systems to
exchange information
electronically in a controlled and
standardized way.
It allows institutions to securely verify
information directly at source instead of
requiring citizens to carry documents
everywhere.
We think of it asa trusted digital bridge
connecting government agencies and
businesses
which means, for example, if someone wants
to open a bank account, their identity can
be verified in real time using their
national ID card.
No more, you know, various forms,
no more going to various places.
So we see this as a way to have a major
shift from turf
government to joint of government,from
data sellers to data sharing
from fragmented systems
to integrated interoperable government
from slow manual processes to real-time
seamless
services.
So I think I will just mention thatone
asour main initiative to answer the question
of moving from silos.
Thank you.
Great.
Love that.
We are trying to do the same at the
UN.
We are trying to do the same at the UN
moving from turf to jointedness and silos to
interoperable one UN responses.
Minister Bhakta, please.
Your final reflections.
Looking at
the clock.
Yeah.
In our country, I think, faces some
different challenges.
But in our
view, the most significant limitation today
is not just financing or maybe accessible
to technology,access to technology
because computing power is becoming more
available.
Its knowledge spreads faster than even
before.
That matters even more the willingness of
the governments and institutions to embrace
and implement changes in our countries.
Digital transformation, I think, is not
only a technological process.
It's above the old
and the process for the change.
And the speed of the change is shaped by
the quality of
our institutions.
The effectiveness of governments, the
ability systems to adapt to new realities.
The second important factor is the
cultural context.
Every country has their own history,
traditions, levels of trust.
As a result, the same technology can be
adapted very differently
across the countries.
In the many ways, this is similar like the
DNA of the society, something
shaped over decades, sometimes centuries.
That is why there is no universal model
for
the digital transformation.
History teaches us one important lesson.
The most sustainable
progress has always happened wherethe
countries remained open to cooperation
to a change
of knowledge to trade technology and new
ideas.
Innovation seldom emerged in isolation.
It
emerged in the intersection of the
knowledge, cultures, and experience.
It's about creating
platforms for collaboration, sharing the best
practices, learning from one another, and
the building trust between our countries.
Ultimately, the success of digital
transformation
is shaped by not only the technology
available to the country.
It's shaped by how the already
societies and institutions are evolved
alongside them.
I think it's also one of the most
important
things before we met withsome different
countries and
discuss how we try to implement technology
but technology is like the tools.
First of all, it's important that your
political structure,
your vision to developing your
country,your society,and the second
it's how you adopt
the different challenges.
Today, maybe artificial intelligence is an
important question, but
after five years,we may be gathering together
anddiscussing the quantum technology.
This
is the tools and challenges we will have in
the future a lot more than before, but how
institutions and how our government make
this technology and implement our society.
I think
this is a more important question. I think
this. Thank you.
Thank you, Minister.
The remaining open and flexible as the
technology frontiers moving
fast.
Thank you for those insights.
For the final word, I call on my sister
Ahuna.
You've
heard the ministers again.
You ended your previous intervention with
this powerful note.
Capital
is there.
We have to unlock it.
How do we work to bring that innovative
financing to bear
on this very important area of digital
transformation?
Thank you.
I think one way is to look at it in a
different context.
So we're not building
bridges and roads here.
It's not the same structure in terms of
investing in infrastructure overall.
This is really a different ballgame.
You need to reimagine a location of
resources, not
in this sort of big portfolio of
infrastructure.
I think it needs some engineering to
understand
what it's calling for, an investment in
DPI.
I think it's also important to have -- the
question on governance is really an
important one.
Having that commitment that's anchored
at the highest political level,but at the
same time has the whole of government
whole
of society character.
We need to make sure that at the table are
young people, women,
the people WHO really need to shape it,
not just be beneficiaries of it.
So that's part
of governance for me.
It's governance architecture is making
sure it's very inclusive.
I agree
with Minister Mallet.
We need to see or at least make an effort
for everyone to see the benefit
for them.
Otherwise, because you're asking for
change, colossal change.
And some of the
people WHO have to walk towards that change
will be affected one way or the other.
But
the question is how are they viewing how
they will be affected?
And there's a lot of want
to be done on trust, transparency, and
transitions.
Having that space for transitions.
Then I think
capital has to be fit forpurpose,like I
was saying
and then communities have to shape it
and collaboration has to be genuine
andhave that
component of being a strategic autonomy.
I think it's really important here that
countries' autonomy is respected.
The sovereignty is
respected, even as we expand the
partnerships across borders. Thank you.
Please join me in thanking our incredible
panel.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, USG.
And before our Honourable Ministers depart,
I think an official photograph will be
taken before you take your leave.
Thank you once again for such an
insightful panel.
I think
please do come to the front here as I also
explain how we are proceeding next.
So we're going to
the fun part of the day, which is a
breakout.
We're going to have one session between
now and
lunch, and then another after lunch.
So as I wait for the sessions to be
projected, I would
encourage you to get your cameras and take
a picture of what I'm about to explain.
I know once
lunch hits the system, we might forget how
the second sessions go.
So I'm just waiting on the
breakout slide, this present projection.
Thank you so much. I know I'm the one
before the session between us and lunch.
So once again,we're going intobreakout
sessions
and they're going to be four of those
available
between now and lunch.
The first session that will be in this
chamber, ECOSOC chamber, is a
DPI approach to next-generation trade and
transport.
The second one that will be in conference
room A
is on advancing population-scale
innovation with safe and inclusive DPI.
The third session in conference room 11
will be DPI sustainability for health,
learning and science.
And last but not least in conference room
9 will be building inclusion,
identity, payments, and the real cost of
DPI.
I really do encourage you to take a
picture of
this as you're walking out to figure out
which one you want to go to.
And I'd like to mention that
after lunch,all right,before we continue
let's do my favorite activity one more
time.
Clap once if you can hear me.
Thank you.
Please give me one minute of your
attention so I can
explain how we're proceeding and you can
take off.
Thank you very much.
So as I mentioned,
these are the breakout sessions that are
about to take place.
Please take note of this because
after lunch, we have another set of
breakout sessions that will start at 3 p.m.
We're going
to have in conference room 9
the public code observatory on mapping
public sector contributions
to open source worldwide.
Conference room 11 will have women
building digital, the GovStack
women in GovTech challenge.
Conference room A will have DPI that
delivers from failure points
to multi stakeholder actions.
And then the ECOSOC chamber will have
making DPI work for children
from country experience to implement the
tactics.
For lunch, that will be on the fourth
floor,
however, that is at your own cost.
And we will gather again here at 4 p.m.
Thank you for your
attention. Enjoy the breakout sessions and
see you at 4 p.m.